---
layout: post
title: Work, Automation, Accountability, and AI - Part 2
tags: work, ai
permalink: /blog/work-automation-accountability-ai-2.html
author: ellie
---

# Work, Automation, Accountability, and AI - Part 2

Part of a series:

1. [What is Work?](/blog/work-automation-accountability-ai-1.html)
2. Deciding on the Work (this post)
3. Accountability
4. AI

# Deciding on the Work

This series explores the question, "can a machine do a human's job?" In the
first part we laid out a framework analyzing various kinds of activity involved
in work, as well as the concept of automation. We touched briefly on composing
the different kinds of work into jobs.

In this part, we will dig more deeply into how value streams are designed and
composed in an enterprise, developing some financial concepts with which to
consider the topic. We will speak more about how jobs are designed, bringing in
some historical context through management philosophies that shape jobs up to
the present day.

## Managing the Value Stream

An enterprise must decide what is to be produced and the work performance
specifications that will apply to its processing steps. These decisions comprise
the activities of managerial discretion. In many organizations this work is
performed by specific value streams set up within the enterprise. To state a few
examples,

- Product development senses customer needs and translates them into product
  requirements and attributes. This function also determines the tolerances and
  specifications of the processing steps to be performed in order to
  successfully build the product.
- Sales and marketing connect the product produced by the enterprise with
  customers able to pay for it. They can also augment sensing functions
  performed by product development.
- People management involves choosing, maintaining, and configuring human
  resources within an enterprise. The people manager's inputs are the work to be
  done, the existing configuration of people (i.e. teams), potential hires,
  their budget, and information from throughout the organization.

The work performed by these functions is heavily imbued with discretion as
individuals applying it navigate ambiguous contexts and make judgement calls
based on their experience. Although these activities do not directly generate
revenue for the enterprise, it's incorrect to say that they do not create value
at all. The value streams they participate in have as their outputs value that
is entirely internal to the enterprise.

In small or less mature organizations, the functions described above may be
performed by less stable value streams, perhaps in ad hoc decisions by the
owners. Nevertheless, they can be described as value streams, producing value
for the enterprise, and whose steps are mostly or entirely discretionary.

## Financial Flows

In talking about commercial enterprises, the flow of money determines much of
how things are set up. The product at the output of a value stream is valuable
to someone, and so brings money into the stream. If product, material, or
information flows _down_ the value stream to its output, then money flows _up_
it. At each processing step, money is apportioned to the inputs at that step.
This could be paying a human worker for their performance of the step, paying a
machine for its automation of the step (equivalent to paying the value stream
that produces the machine), paying a supplier for raw materials, paying rent on
land used, or paying for intermediate product—the output of the previous
processing step. Money is also apportioned to the act of exercising work
discretion, so a worker's experience and accountability commands a price.

Managerial discretion must also be allocated an amount, but may be difficult to
assign to any particular processing step. To simplify the analysis, we will say
that the above stepwise apportionment continues upstream until all inputs are
accounted for. Following this, money that is leftover is allocated to managerial
discretion and return on capital. It's perhaps a matter of negotiation between
investors and representatives of the management hierarchy to decide this split.

This picture is quite idealized. In practice, it is very difficult to precisely
allocate the money flowing up the value stream. In addition, the enterprise
evolves and changes over time, so any configuration of value streams and
financial allocations will be unstable and invalidated with new information
flowing into the enterprise. Financial allocations must, in general, be given a
degree of slop or wiggle room to absorb these changes.

Given any snapshot in time, however, financial considerations inform the
decisions made about how value streams are set up. We will consider how for
automatable and non-automatable processing steps in turn.

### Automatable Processing

Setting up an automatable processing step involves different things depending on
whether a human or machine will do the work. When a machine is performing the
step, it involves setting up an _entirely new value stream_ to produce and
maintain the machine. Sometimes this setup occurs (or already exists) within a
different enterprise, and the machine is purchased or rented. Alternately, the
enterprise may set up the value stream within itself, avoiding payment to a
separate enterprise, and also building its own internal capability. The choice
of whether to automate (have a machine do it) or not (have a human do it)
depends on several factors.

#### Startup and Maintenance

The first and most obvious factor is called startup costs. In the case of a
human worker, startup cost is their training for the task. For a machine, it is
purchasing or renting the machine from another enterprise or setting up a value
stream to build and maintain it. And it is typically more costly to start up a
worker or machine from rest or another task than it is to continue running an
already "warm" performer. Maintenance costs are those costs incurred to ensure
the processing step continues to operate at the specified level of performance
over time. For humans, it might be ongoing training and skills growth. For
machines, it is continuing to pay the value stream that produces the machine or
another stream that provides for its continued operation.

The choice of which of these costs to pay depends on circumstances specific to
the context in which the work is being done. Is the work a one-time or
occasional thing, not repeated often or at all? If so, then it might make more
sense to pay a human to perform the work rather than paying the costs of
automating it.

#### Technology

The available technology has a lot to say about whether a machine can be used to
perform a processing step. In an automatable processing step, the specification
or tolerance determines what technology must be used to create a machine that
can perform the task. The smaller the tolerance, the more sophisticated the
required technology, and, generally, the more complex and costly the value
stream that produces the machine must be.

A human might be able to perform an automatable processing step to tight
tolerance, sometimes even greater than a machine can for any available
technology. I'm reminded of a remarkable man named Achim Leistner who
hand-polished the world's roundest object. But there are even more pedestrian
tasks at which humans excel and machines struggle, such as operating an
automobile in the presence of uncertain road conditions, other vehicles, and,
uh, pedestrians (although advances are apparently being made in this area, I'm
compelled to use this example for the pedestrian joke).

In many cases, there is a choice between human or machine performance. There is
a limit to the amount of money that can be allocated to work performance at a
processing step, and this will strongly inform the decision.

#### Configuration and Changeover

We will now consider the lifecycle of value streams. In some enterprises value
streams are large, visible, and long-lived. These types of streams probably have
large associated costs and therefore can only be used for high-valued outputs.
Other value streams might be ephemeral, only existing briefly to create an
output and then disappearing.

In our discussion above, we considered a single value stream producing a single
kind of output. This description is simplified. There might be multiple
varieties of the final product, which entail adjustments to the stream's
configuration. There may also be changeover of the product or rapidly switching
amongst products. The decisions that choose these configurations may be made by
a formal manager or by the workers themselves.

Each time a value stream changeover or reconfiguration occurs, there are
generally startup costs associated with it above that of the steady-state cost
of operating in one configuration continuously. For human workers, there are
cognitive context-switching costs and perhaps training. For machines there are
startup costs or reconfiguration costs of the value stream which produces the
machine.

The decision to use machines or humans depends on these costs, technology, and
the real or expected lifecycles of the value stream(s) involved.

### Non-Automatable Processing

A non-automatable processing step is basically one in which work discretion
cannot be removed from the performance of the task. The discretion is ingrained
in the nature of the task itself or is a consequence of the material or context
in which the task is to be performed. The task may involve rapidly switching
between applying work performance and work discretion, and the work performance
phase of the task may be aided by "tooling" which is a type of machinery (again,
created and maintained by some separate value stream). Some examples from
various crafts can help to illustrate.

#### Woodworking

A woodworker might use hand tools—knives, chisels, and the like—to process his
work material, wood, into a product. There are several levels of discretion that
are applied. The first is managerial discretion deciding and planning what to
produce in the large scale, which we will ignore for the moment. At a smaller
scale, the worker makes many small decisions in deciding and adjusting details
in the cuts and joins of the wood. At an even smaller scale, when passing their
tooling through the material, he makes innumerable micro "decisions" about the
application of force as the tool passes through unexpected variations in wood
density and grain.

There are various ways that the discretion may be removed from some levels of
the process. One might be the substitution of powered tools for hand tools. When
this is done, then the micro "decisions" are less relevant as the tool can power
through the variations with ease. This can end in failure, however, if there is
excessive chipping of the wood as it is being worked. This failure might be
overcome by guaranteeing more consistency in the wood input to the step and more
precise application of the tool.

Slowly, as we remove variation in material and processing, and apply more energy
and power to the process, we can see a heavily automated manufacturing line
begin to take form. However, this entails a transformation of the product: from
a hand-crafted one to a mass-produced one (mass-production being necessary to
justify the cost of all this automation). Evidently, the discretion applied by
the hand woodworker is a part of the appeal and the value of a hand-crafted wood
product.

#### Programming

Programming involves the creation of an information processing machine. In most
cases this machine performs data manipulation for another value stream—is an
automation—but, as we saw before, automation is itself the output of a value
stream, so we will consider the "processing step" of programming here.

The programmer takes as her inputs the requirements of the program to be written
(an output of the "product discovery" process step), the architecture that she
is contributing to, the software interfaces that it is to interact with,
algorithms (known or looked up using Google, Stack Overflow, LLM, etc.), and the
machine that it will run on. Her tooling comprises a text editor or integrated
development environment, a test suite (that she is expected to write herself,
generally), the compiler, etc.

As the programmer writes the program she has to constantly make many small but
consequential decisions. How should this function be named? What interface shall
be publicly exposed? What is the most efficient way to execute this process? And
so on. Her tooling can help by providing things like auto-completion, but she
exercises discretion in deciding whether or not to use what is suggested. Her
queries using a search engine also involve the judgement of whether what is
found is applicable or can be adapted to her current problem. She considers
factors involved in later processing steps. Will this name be confusing to
reviewers and future developers? Will this interface leak implementation details
and become a maintenance nightmare? Does the design conform to architectural
principles set forth by the team?

The questions the programmer must consider constantly throughout her work are
frequently open ended, and the decisions she makes must take into account
various social and technical contexts.

#### Consequences

There's no decision between human and machine performance here. Non-automatable
processing steps, by definition, cannot be automated by a machine unless it is
able to apply work discretion, and therefore be held accountable for its
decisions. This seems like a silly notion, but we'll look at it more carefully
later on. The _actual_ decision to be made is whether to replace the
non-automatable process itself with an automatable one. Sometimes this is
impossible because it changes the nature of the product, as in the case of
hand-crafted wood products. Sometimes it is technically impossible or
infeasible.

As we discussed earlier, at a processing step money will accrue to the work
discretion as well as work performance. The presence or absence of work
discretion therefore influences the cost of the processing step, so the removal
of it (thereby changing the step to an automatable one) would have the effect of
eliminating that component of the cost. This may appear worthwhile if it does
not result in increased costs that wipe out the associated savings, or if it
decreases the processing time of the step such that the revenue flowing into the
value stream can be increased.

An often overlooked consequence of such a decision is the reduced flexibility of
the value stream to adapt to uncertain or changing conditions since, as we
discussed previously, the performance variability injected by work discretion
helps to increase its resilience. For a fun fictional example, in Vernor Vinge's
_A Deepness in the Sky_ (one of my favorite books) the pathologies of automation
were frequently so great as to wreck entire planetary societies when their
systems, for example, experienced a "deadlock." My interpretation is that the
author is not speaking strictly of computerized or mechanized automation. A
political system can employ "automation" when choices are narrowed by strict
procedure and rules. Legal systems remove discretion (employ "automation")
through deference to precedence and statute.

It is worth noting that automation can be designed in such away that discretion
can be injected at points when it is needed. A real-world example comes from the
products of Toyoda Automatic Loom Works (whose ideas were later built upon by
Toyota Motor Corporation) which created textiles automatically but that, when a
string break was detected, halted to allow a human to intervene. This principle
was called "autonomation" or "automation with a human touch." In the software
industry we frequently embody this spirit, designing automated pipelines that
stop and send out alerts for human intervention in case of faults.

## Profits and Growth

In commercial enterprises, management is preoccupied with profit and/or growth.
The enterprise's investors require either the distribution of profits or the
reinvestment of those profits into growing the principal investment. The
management structure is accountable for delivering on this mandate. Now, in a
privately-held enterprise the investors may be satisfied with operating at a
loss if other desires are satisfied, such as social or environmental good, but
this is not common. In publicly-owned enterprises there is, at least in the
United States and to a lesser extent elsewhere, a legal requirement, to which
the highest officers of an enterprise are held accountable, to deliver the
greatest possible financial return to shareholders.

For either goal, profit or growth—and even when operating at a loss—decreasing
the costs incurred by the enterprise is a paramount concern. At any moment in
time, a given amount of revenue is flowing in due to the sale of the its
outputs. If the amount of money allocated to direct inputs in the value stream
can be reduced, then there is more leftover for management discretion and
investors (profit taken either as distributions or reinvested into the
enterprise to drive growth).

There are a variety of ways to reduce costs in the value stream. More efficient
use of material or automated resources is one example. In a great many cases,
however, the costs allocated to the human workers in the value stream are the
greatest component, so reducing the amount spent on humans is often the most
effective way to reduce costs. This may be achieved in a couple of different
ways.

One is to replace a human performing an automatable processing step with a
machine. This may be a virtuous change if the work that was done was extremely
manual and required little skill, a soul-draining task that we call "toil" in
the software industry. If, on the other hand, a highly skilled worker who had
spent a lot of time refining and improving her hand at this task were replaced
by a machine, then the outcome might rightly be called tragic. In either case
the cost of the machine, amortized over time, must be less than the cost of the
human performing the task over the same period, or the processing time must be
reduced to such a degree as to allow for decreased takt time (delivery time, and
therefore, increased revenue) for the value stream. The opportunity cost for the
worker performing the task may also be such that the alternative uses for her
energies also create a financial justification for the change.

A second way is to replace a non-automatable task with an automatable one. We
often hear this in the context of replacing "skilled" labor with "unskilled."
Presumably, the unskilled laborer has less developed skills and experience in
the task at hand, and therefore is less able to exercise discretion in
performing the work. We said before that work discretion commands a financial
allocation, so removing that component can greatly reduce the cost of the
processing step. It can be the case, however, that the skilled worker is not
actually replaced. Perhaps she has nowhere to go and stays in her job. If she's
lucky, she can make alternative higher-valued uses of her energy and time, but
if not, then eventually, unless her pay is reduced, she will eventually be seen
as an excess cost to be cut.

### Management Philosophies

The humans in the management hierarchy are generally of small number compared to
the workers performing direct work within the enterprise value streams. As they
perform tasks that are almost entirely discretionary, they are often seen as the
"brain" of the enterprise, while the workers are seen as its "hands." Since they
are of small number, and performing what is considered high-value management
discretion, they can command much higher financial allocations (on an individual
basis, if not necessarily in aggregate) than the bulk of the workers in the
value stream.

If you will suffer the metaphor a bit longer, a certain type of brain tends to
think highly of itself as compared to hands and feet. It wishes to exercise
complete control over the body, coordinating and orchestrating its motions. If a
hand were to move independently this brain would panic and reassert control. If
the right hand didn't know what the left was doing, resulting in a fumble, the
brain considers this its own failing or blames the hands for their inability to
function as desired. The brain sees itself as the control center—the true
being—of which the body is merely an extension.

If management tends to think of itself in this way (not to say that they
_consciously_ do #NotAllManagers), then it will view with hostility actions of
workers that it cannot exercise total control over. Even if the worker in the
value stream is "rowing in the same direction" as the ship of enterprise, all of
his actions aligned with maximizing shareholder value, the possibility that he
might hold a different goal in his heart gives management unease. The idea that
he might make choices about the speed or technique that he applies to his work
implies variability in his work performance. We've noted that automatable work
is done to a specification, and that variability within tolerance is technically
allowable, any deviation from nominal performance is seen as waste to be
eliminated, regardless of specification. Further, skilled labor that is
non-substitutable represents a risk if the worker chooses to end their
employment (I realize we haven't talked about risk, but at _risk_ of making this
article too long, I _choose_ to skip the topic. It's super important, but I can
get my main points across without it).

Does management in today's enterprise think of the worker in this way? It
definitely must consider many of these things, but I will not cynically declare
that managers necessarily feel the feelings described above. _However_, it is
undeniable that the makeup of the commercial enterprise creates structural
forces that compel management in this direction. The presence of accountability
for profits and growth shapes the enterprise at all levels. Regardless of
aspirations and mission statements, the commercial enterprise (especially in the
corporate legal form) must always yield to profits through revenue maximization
and cost minimization.

Removing work discretion serves management's needs in two ways. First, as we
described above, it removes cost from the value stream, directly impacting the
profitability of the enterprise. Second, it supports the psychological need of
humans to have control over that which can affect their destiny, negatively or
positively. That is, it removes discretion and accountability from the value
stream, concentrating it in the management hierarchy.

This drive toward concentration has a long history. By the late 1700s the
proliferation of standardization and interchangeable parts in manufacturing was
ushering in the industrial age. Rather than relying on custom, one-of-a-kind
parts fashioned by skilled craftspeople, it began to be possible to mass-produce
parts that could interchangeably be substituted for one another. This kind of
production used standard work procedures and tooling and could be done by
relatively unskilled labor, allowing for a larger labor pool and lower wages
overall.

It reached its pinnacle in the concept of "scientific management," also known as
Taylorism due one of its pioneers, Frederick Winslow Taylor. This philosophy of
management emphasizes such techniques as "time-motion studies," in which a
worker's movements are examined and timed using a stopwatch, and all extraneous
movements are to be eliminated. A worker's motions are precisely prescribed, and
the ultimate goal is to effectively remove all discretion from the work. Total
concentration of discretion and creativity in management is the ultimate goal
and aim of scientific management.

These management philosophies had various effects on society, many of them
tragically dislocating for labor, but also increasing the material efficiency
and profitability of industry. Much (mostly worker) blood has been spilled
seeking the balance between these concerns, and battle is being fought in
workplaces to the present day. Today, the management intellectual pendulum has
swung back from the extremes of scientific management as it is widely
acknowledged that some degree of intelligence and discretion simply must be left
in the hands and brain of the worker to generate business agility, resilience,
and innovation (oh, yeah, and profit). It is an economic fact that automation is
often ill-suited to the needs of the enterprise, and that non-automatable work
has an indispensable place. Yet, the structural forces remain.

## Jobs Revisited

The typical full-time employment arrangement has a human worker performing
various kinds of tasks for an enterprise. A non-management employee will
sometimes be preoccupied with the "trunk" of the enterprise, the value stream
that brings revenue into the enterprise. They might be involved in one of its
"branches," an internal value stream that feeds into the trunk. Or they might
sometimes even be performing managerial work. A typical job will have the worker
engaged with a specific value stream most of their time on the job, but their
day often comprises a mix of these activities. Sometimes the worker is a
generalist that bounces all over the place in the enterprise.

Shifting a human from one task to another involves a cognitive shift, as well as
a physical one in many cases. And the choice of if and when such shifts are to
be made is managerial discretion. Both of these represent costs. The former pure
waste to be eliminated if possible, and the latter one to be exercised by the
management hierarchy if possible. Indeed, many workers would like nothing more
than to be "just told what to do," disliking the ambiguity and accountability
involved with applying managerial discretion, and preferring to simply apply
their skills in work performance and work discretion.

Thus, the interest of the worker and management are often harmonious with
respect to how a job is composed. Management would like to avoid the cost
involved with task switching, and the worker would like to avoid the
accountability for managerial discretion, which management is tasked with and
compensated for anyways. An effort is therefore made to keep a worker engaged
uninterrupted in a single task for as long as possible.

There are peculiarities to the human psyche that influence their job. Skilled
workers usually receive intrinsic reward for applying work performance and
discretion. They seek a "flow" state of being focused and immersed in the
activity. Of course, most humans also seek growth. They become bored with a task
or, after achieving a sense of mastery, seek other domains to conquer. Some
humans are naturally generalists and feel reward in the act of switching tasks.
Fitting the right human into the right job and appropriately evolving their job
over time is the essence of people management. Contrast this with the machine,
which can perform the same task tirelessly over and over, demanding none of the
costly job affordances of the human worker.

Management philosophies and the law have shaped the composition and definition
of jobs in important ways. It is somewhat arbitrary to divide management from
workers in the way that we have, to be honest. If the managerial discretion
applied to the value stream is _itself_ a value stream, then there should be
little justification in a differing conceptual treatment. Indeed, some of the
things like product management and engineering that we discussed above are,
while highly discretionary and "managerial" in a sense, performed by "workers"
and not "managers." What accounts for the distinction, then?

One of the more important distinctions is the legal one between people managers,
with their attendant power to hire and fire, and workers with no people "under"
them. The legal system places great accountability, through labor regulations,
on these managers. Another distinction is the officers of the enterprise,
mentioned previously, who are held responsibility for its financial performance.
And there are other factors, such as professional licensing, that create
accountability structures for certain kinds of workers.

The legal peculiarities of accountability cause tension when discretion is
formally separated from it. For very simple value streams there is usually good
enough alignment. In large enterprises, when accountability is formally
concentrated in the management hierarchy and discretion is distributed in the
workforce, we see the tension play out as management tries to drive discretion
out of the work. We're starting to see a separation of _formal_ accountability
from discretion here. While we still maintain that _moral_ accountability cannot
be separated from discretion, formal accountability as allotted by human
organizations may create an artificial separation.

### Breaking Jobs Apart

Management choices can have potentially tragic consequences on the humans
involved in work within the enterprise. Very often management is incentivised or
required to take these very measures. In the name of economic efficiency we have
seen skilled workers be replaced by unskilled ones supported by systems of
automation.

A full-time job can be broken into pieces when the component parts are divided
amongst contractors performing "gig-work." The impetus for this effort is to
drive out any wiggle room that the financial allocation to the work may have, as
well as to increase the utilization of labor resources. Modern platforms have
reduced the transaction costs associated with finding a worker to perform a
one-off or ad-hoc task. Supposed benefits to the worker in these arrangements
are "flexibility" and "unlimited money as long as you _hustle_," but more often
the worker gets nothing but precarity.

The use of contract labor can relax the tension caused by discretion and
accountability misalignment, since the worker is made into an entrepreneur.
Gig-work "entrepreneurs" are usually in name and legal status only, as the
platform exerts so much control over all aspects of the work.

## Conclusion

This post has illustrated some of the main factors that go into deciding what
and how work will be done in the enterprise. We have introduced financial
concepts describing how money flows into the enterprise and costs are allocated,
how management incentives and mandates drive decisions about how the work is
designed, and how these choices affect jobs. This gives a good base from which
to discuss automation technologies such as "AI," but before that we must
interrogate some of the assumptions and assertions we've made about the moral
concept of accountability. We have asserted that discretion always entails
accountability. This claim demands further investigation, which we will do in
the next part of this series. We will also look at the notion of formal vs.
moral accountability more closely.
