---
layout: post
title: New Year Blogging 2025
permalink: /blog/new-year-2025.html
author: ellie
---

# New Year Blogging 2025

I started this blog last fall and got one post out. I _meant_ to write more, and
I've had plenty of ideas rattling around in my head that made me go, "I'm gonna
write about that!" But, alas, I don't have the discipline to sit down and write,
and am too much of a perfectionist, so none of that happened :/

I'm making a resolution to try again this year! I just read the book _Deep Work_
by Cal Newport, and I found it inspiring. I have lots to think about with
regards to my work life and side projects and such, but it did give me a couple
ideas to try to jump start this blog again.

For my blogging habit, what I want to do is set aside a defined number of hours
(I'm going to choose 6-8 AM Mondays) to write as intensely as possible without
distractions, producing a blog post from start to finish during that time. It's
likely going to be rough at first as I find my writing voice, learn to manage
the writing time, and extract a blog post from the dryer lint that has collected
in my brain throughout the week. But it'll get better.

I like the idea of giving myself a constraint like this, as I tend toward the
aforementioned perfectionism and never thinking I have enough information or
knowledge to write what I want to write about. To further combat this, I'm going
to have another constraint to _not look up anything_ during those two hours. I
go into the writing period with what's in my brain and that's it. I am going to
give this constraint one slight tweak here, which is to have a single note card,
on which to jot notes throughout the week, that I can also bring to the writing
session. That's it, though.

I think this will be a fun experiment, and you should see approximately 52 more
blog posts this year :D

Happy New Year!

UPDATE (2025-01-09): So not looking things up is too hard. I can't write without
a dictionary or thesaurus 😅 And looking up titles and things is necessary. So
my plan is to just keep it to a reasonable limit. Also, I don't wanna carry
around a note card and pen—I'll use a notes app on my phone, which I literally
always have.

UPDATE (2025-01-26): It turns out that it's difficult to cram a blog post "from
start to finish" into a 2 hour period. And I'm finding myself wanting to write
about things that just take up more time and space than that constraint allows.
I will still write intensely from 6-8 AM Mondays (and Tuesdays and Wednesdays
and other times during lunch breaks and evenings, as it so happens), but will
relax the constraints and simply try to "publish a blog post every week" lol.
